Fix code examples (#168)
CodeYourFuture/syllabus: docs/js-core-1/week-1/lesson.md

- [Hello World](#hello-world)
- [Variables](#variables)
- [Strings](#strings)
- [Numbers](#numbers)
- [Statements & expressions](#statements-and-expressions)
- [Functions](#functions)

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this class, you should be able to:

- Use `console.log()` to print information to the console
- Use `typeof` to find the type of a variable
- Assign data to variables using `let` and `const`
- Define what expressions and statements are and describe the difference
- Write and call functions in JavaScript
- Manipulate strings with concatenation and interpolation techniques

> - Manipulate numbers with mathematical operators using the `Math` library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Manipulate numbers with mathematical operators and using the `Math` library
```

> - List and describe the different primitive data types in JS

Reviewer: (I realise you didn't change this, but...) We don't actually teach this at all, we just define it in a glossary at the bottom... Maybe worth removing, and just not introducing the term "primitive"? We're already introducing a _lot_ of definitions i this lesson...

Reviewer 2: > We don't actually teach this at all

To me this is the more salient point: we shouldn't really have a LO that we don't actually fulfil.

- Use `typeof` to find the type of a variable
- Assign data to variables using `let` and `const`
- What are expressions and statements (and what's the difference)?

> - Define what expressions and statements are and describe the difference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define what expressions and statements are and describe the difference
```

These seem the same

Reviewer 2: I would also lean towards the latter. I try to follow [Teaching Tech Together's advice](https://teachtogether.tech/en/index.html#s:process-objectives) that LOs should be (somewhat) objectively answered: can the trainee demonstrate this knowledge or not.

> - Write, call and evaluate functions in JavaScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write and call functions in JavaScript
```

I'm not sure what evaluate is referring to here... Maybe the playing-computer style stuff? But I don't think we do that in this lesson?

Before you use a variable in a JavaScript program, you must declare it. Variables are declared with _let_ and _const_ keywords as follows.

```js

> let greeting = 'Hello world';

Reviewer 2: Apologies if this is nitpicking, but I think we try to stick to the default Prettier settings since that is what trainees would have set up on their systems.

The default settings are for double quotes, not single (see in the [playground](https://prettier.io/playground/#N4Igxg9gdgLgprEAuEAbOMAEBzATnDASym0wF5MByACTlVQkwHcJdUATSgbhABoQIABxiFoAZ2SgAhrlwQmABRkIJKKaiZSAnhP4AjXFLABrDAGVBR4tmQxcAVzj84AWz1x27DwBkpJe1LYcABirC5SMCIkyCBS9jAQfCAAFjAuqADqyYTwYpZgcGYqOYQAbjlaMWBiuiDEYnC4MAqG2OHIAGbqDfwAVmIAHgBChibmUi5w3sRwnd1OIP0DZtboAIr2EPBzqD0glrgNuDF6Uu6oSYK4xDAZhOwwycgAHAAM-FcQDRmGgjFXcCOpVm-AAjpt4C0hKpYmIALRQAhedhJfDgwj4FqBdpILq7BYNFyEWwOAmrOAbLazXHzfgwM53B5PJAAJjphkIqGsAGEIC4cSBAQBWJL2BoAFTOqjxe1KjgAklAvLAzGBrsIAIJKswwLToHYNAC+hqAA)).

Perhaps you have some personal Prettier settings that are overwriting?

Reviewer 3: Yeah I've changed those now using the default settings in Prettier. Do you think it is worth adding a `.prettierrc` file

const quotient = 10 / 2; // 5
const difference = 10 - 2; // 8
```
#### Expected result

```sh
Number of students: 15
Number of mentors: 8
Total number of students and mentors: 23
```

> ### Numbers as decimals

Reviewer: This new block means there's quite a bit of space between the un-explained "Expected result" above, and the problem statement below - can we move the "Expected result" section down?

> Numbers can be integers (whole numbers) or floats (numbers with a decimal point).

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should change the section header to "Numbers as floats" (or "Floating point numbers")? Or is that getting too much into details?

## Statements and expressions

In JavaScript, sections of code can be called **expressions** and **statements**. We will use these words frequently to describe code.

### Expression

Any unit of code that can be evaluated to a value is known as an **expression**.

We say that an expression _evaluates to_ a value.
We use expressions all the time in lot of different places:

- they can be assigned to variables
- returned from functions (more on this later)
- passed as arguments to functions (more on this later)
- combined with other expressions to form new expressions

The following are all examples of expressions:

```js
1 + 1; // evaluates to 2
("hello"); // evaluates to "hello"
2 * 4; // evaluates to 8
"Hello" + "World"; // evaluates to "HelloWorld"
```

We can take the value produced by an expression and assign it to a variable.

```js
let total = 1 + 1; // assign the expression 1 + 1 to a variable total
let greeting = "hello"; // assign the expression "hello" to a variable greeting
let product = 2 * 4; // assign the expression 2 * 4 to a variable product

> let worldGreeting = "Hello" + "World"; // assign the expression "Hello" + "World" to a variable worldGreeting

Reviewer: I think this might be clearer as:
```suggestion
let total = 1 + 1; // assign the value 2 (the value produced by the expression 1 + 1) to a variable total
let greeting = "hello"; // assign the value "hello" (the value produced by the expression expression "hello") to a variable greeting
let product = 2 * 4; // assign the value 8 (the value produced by the expression 2 * 4) to a variable product
let worldGreeting = "Hello" + "World"; // assign the value "HelloWorld" (the value produced by the expression "Hello" + "World" to a variable worldGreeting)
```
to emphasise that once an expression is evaluated, it doesn't matter how we got there, it has that value now

> 

Reviewer 2: Can't comment on it since it hasn't changed, but there's a typo on line 230 above: `Intructor` should be `Instructor`

> Pick one thing on your table that you can do other than `Math.round` and prepare an explanation for the rest of the class.

Reviewer 2: Apologies, I feel like I'm nitpicking things that are already in the lesson.

This line is confusing: I think it is referencing a table from in-person lessons, and getting students on a table to work together. Would something like this work?

```suggestion
Working in small groups, pick one other thing that `Math` can do and prepare a short (2 - 3 min) explanation for the rest of the class. 
```

> You can also use expressions with string interpolation or as a `return` value.

Reviewer: We haven't introduced functions/return/expressions yet, so maybe drop this section, or move it to later in the lesson?

```js
console.log(`2 + 4 is ${2 + 4}`); // 2 + 4 inside the string template evaluates to 6

function double(num) {
  return num * 2; // expression num * 2 being returned from this function
}
```

## Statements and expressions

In JavaScript, there are **expressions** and **statements**. 
We will use these words frequently to describe code.

> ### Statement

Reviewer 2: What do you think of rephrasing a bit to give more context?

```suggestion
In JavaScript, sections of code can called **expressions** and **statements**. We will use these words frequently to describe code.

### Statement
```

(I also cleaned up some of the newlines - unsure what your intention was though.)

A statement is some code that typically carries out an instruction. You have encountered statements already:

```js
const greeting = "Hello Code Your Future!";
```

The above piece of code is a **variable declaration**, which is also a statement. 

> This statement is just an instruction to store the value `"Hello Code Your Future!"` in the variable `greeting`.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should try to leave out words like "just" out? I think it reads cleanly without it?

```suggestion
This statement is an instruction to store the value `"Hello Code Your Future!"` in the variable `greeting`.
```

> Statements end in a semi-colon, though they can be omitted in JavaScript.

Reviewer: Being pedantic, block statements (e.g. if statements) are delimited with braces rather than semi-colons... I'm not sure whether to soften this sentence to something like "Most statements end in a semi-colon", or just skip over this for simplicity...

That said... I'm not actually sure introducing the term "statement" is useful for the lesson? Like, we don't rely on it anywhere, and it's not practically useful knowledge... Maybe we should just remove the "Statement" section completely, and only explain expressions?

Reviewer 2: We did discuss that understanding of what "evaluating an expression" means is a useful tool for instructors, and I do think we refer to things like "if statements" fairly often. So having a definition is perhaps a good idea.

I would lean towards moving the statements section below the expressions section. I think it may be easier to define statements in context of expressions: "If expressions are single units of JavaScript that the engine can evaluate, statements can contain one or more different expressions, and are executed by the engine to perform an operation" ([source](https://flaviocopes.com/javascript-statements/))

Reviewer 2: Also, what do you think about leaving out the point about semi-colons being optional?

Benefits:

- Prettier enforces semis by default, so trainees shouldn't have to worry about them
- JS' automatic semi-colon insertion is infamously weird, and discussing it will be distracting

Drawbacks:

- Some volunteers (like myself) are in the habit of leaving off semis, so it tends to come up when live-coding

I am a bit on the fence, but lean towards leaving it out.

There are other different types of statements that we will learn about in the coming weeks.

### Expression

> Any unit of code that can be evaluated to a value is known as an **expression**.<br />
> We say that an expression _evaluates to_ a value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any unit of code that can be evaluated to a value is known as an **expression**.

We say that an expression _evaluates to_ a value.
```

We use expressions all the time in lot of different places:

- they can be assigned to variables
- returned from functions (more on this later)
- passed as arguments to functions (more on this later)
- combined with other expressions to form new expressions

The following are all examples of expressions:

```js
1 + 1 // evaluates to 2
"hello" // evaluates to "hello"
2 * 4 // evaluates to 8
"Hello" + "World" // evaluates to "HelloWorld"
```

We can take the value produced by an expression and assign it to a variable.

```js
let total = 1 + 1; // assign the expression 1 + 1 to a variable total
let greeting = "hello"; // assign the expression "hello" to a variable greeting
let product = 2 * 4; // assign the expression 2 * 4 to a variable product
let worldGreeting = "Hello" + "World"; // assign the expression "Hello" + "World" to a variable worldGreeting
```

### Exercise ( 15 mins )

You can run `node` by itself, which will open a _node console_, also called a [Read–Eval–Print Loop (REPL)](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/nodejs/nodejs_repl_terminal.htm).

> This console allows you to enter code in the console line by line and is a great way of testing bits of code before writing it in a script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This console allows you to enter code in the console line by line and is a great way of testing bits of code before writing it in a script. Each time you press enter, it will print out what the expression you typed evaluates to.
```

In your terminal, run the command `node` and then enter a line of code from the code below and then run enter. Do this for each line of code in the list.
Think about the following questions each time:

What is the output in the terminal each time ?
Is there anything you didn't expect ?

Can you work out which of the lines of code below are **expressions** and which are not ?

> _Remember it can only be an expression if you can place it on the right hand side of an assignment._

Reviewer 2: This feels a bit out of place, since it's the first time it's come up.

What do you think about adding a (small) section comparing expressions and statements, where we could show a code snippet with the differences?

```js
1 + 2

"hello"

"hello" + " " + "students and volunteers!"

let favouriteColour = "purple"

favouriteColour

"hello" + 42

if (true) {}

const hoursInADay = 24

hoursInADay * 7

`My favourite colour is ${favouriteColour}`
```

> (To exit the node REPL, you have to click Ctrl+d or Cmd+D on Mac)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(To exit the node REPL, you have to click Ctrl+d)
```

It's actually still Ctrl+d on Mac - Cmd+D will duplicate your terminal into a split pane (or so I just found out by trying!)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(To exit the node REPL, you have to press Ctrl+d)
```

Apologies, I feel like I'm overly nitpicking here.

}
```

To use a function then we we need to **call** it ( some people will say **invoke** )

```js
const result = double(2);

console.log(result); // 4
```

The function `double` is being called by placing parathenses after the name of the function like this `double()`

🔑
The input given to a function is called a **argument**

🔑 A **parameter** is a variable that is used to refer to an **argument**

In the example above, we're saying that inside the function `double`, there is a variable called number, but we don't know what the value of the variable is until someone calls the function, at which point they will give a value for that variable.

A function can have one or more **parameters**, check out the example below:

```js
function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}
```

In the function `add`, the parameters are `a` and `b`.

> If we call the function like this `add(10, 32)` then we're passing 2 arguments (or inputs) into the function : `10` and `32`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we call the function like this `add(10, 32)` then we're passing 2 arguments (or inputs) into the function : `10` and `32`. We can use any expression as an argument.
```

- don't use `console.log` inside the body of the function

Call `increaseByHalf` a few times with different inputs and `console.log` the outputs in order to check your function is working properly.

Now declare a variable called `pocketMoney` and assign to it a value of `413`.

Someone's been generous and decided to increase your `pocketMoney` by 50% 😎

Using the functions `increaseByHalf` and `formatPenceToPounds` only, find the new amount of pocket money as a string in pounds with a `£` symbol at the front.

Then use `console.log` the output in order to check your function.

---

3. Check out the code below:

```js
function printMessage(x) {
  console.log("Hello, nice to meet you " + x);
}

function getMessage(name) {
  return "Hello, nice to meet you " + name;
}

printMessage("Mitch");

printMessage("August");

getMessage("Laetitia");
```

The functions above behave similarly but _differ_ in some important ways.

In groups, study the code above and then answer the following questions:

a) How many times is the function `printMessage` called ?
b) How many times is the function `getMessage` called ?
c) What is the parameter name for the function `printMessage` ?

> d) What is the parameter name for the function `getMessage` ?

Reviewer: These aren't rendering as bullet points, they're all wrapped on one line - you may need to use numbers instead of letters here?

Discuss briefly which **parameter name** is better out of the two functions and why ?

e) What is the **return value** of the function `printMessage` whenever it is called ?

Someone then creates 2 further variables `messageForAli` and `curiousMessage`:

```js
const messageForAli = getMessage("Ali");

const curiousMessage = getMessage(42);
```

f) What will the variable `messageForAli` evaluate to when the code above is executed ?
g) What will the variable `curiousMessage` evaluate to when the code above is executed ?

Remember you can use `console.log` to log variables in order to check your answers to f) and g)

Hint: Think carefully about the parameters and arguments for `getMessage` for part g)

### Exercise (10 minutes)

> 1. Swap your laptop with your neighbouring pair and review each other's code for the `formatPenceToPounds` and `increaseByHalf` exercise - what can be improved? Is the code readable?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Swap your laptop with your neighbouring pair (or send your code to them over slack) and review each other's code for the `formatPenceToPounds` and `increaseByHalf` exercise - what can be improved? Is the code readable?
```

}
```

To use a function then we we need to **call** it ( some people will say **invoke** )

```js
const result = double(2);

console.log(result); // 4
```

> The function `double` is being invoked by placing parathenses after the name of the function like this `double()`

Reviewer 2: Given that we say "call" as the main verb above, and most volunteers in my experience use that, could we change to:

```suggestion
The function `double` is being called by placing parathenses after the name of the function like this `double()`
```

🔑
The input given to a function is called a **argument**

> 🔑 A **parameter** is a variable that is used to refer to an **argument**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
🔑 A **parameter** is a variable that is used to refer to an **argument**

In the example above, we're saying that inside the function `double`, there is a variable called `number`, but we don't know what the value of the variable is - when someone calls the function, they will give a value for that variable.
```

Reviewer 2: What do you think about rephrasing Daniel's suggestion to:

> In the example above, we're saying that inside the function `double`, there is a variable called `number`, but we don't know what the value of the variable is until someone calls the function, at which point they will give a value for that variable.

A function can have one or more **parameters**, check out the example below:

```js
function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}
```

In the function `add`, the parameters are `a` and `b`.

> If we call the function like this `add(10,32)` then we're passing 2 arguments (or inputs) into the function : `10` and `32`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we call the function like this `add(10, 32)` then we're passing 2 arguments (or inputs) into the function : `10` and `32`.
```

When you write a function (sometimes called _declaring a function_) you can define the parameters with any valid variable name.

The function below does exactly the same thing as the one above:

```js
function add(num1, num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
}
```

### Exercises (20 minutes)

> Try creating a new file when solving the each of the questions below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a new file (`js1-week1-exercises.js`), try solving each of the questions below:
```

1. Create a function called `formatPenceToPounds` that should

- take a number as an input ( representing an amount of money in pence )

> - return a string starting with a`£` sign and the input number converted to pounds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- return a string starting with a `£` sign and the input number converted to pounds.
```

For example, `formatPenceToPounds(199)` should evaluate to `"£1.99"`

In your groups, think carefully about the following things:

- what the parameter name should be
- creating good names for any variables you use
- don't use `console.log` inside the body of the function

Call `formatPenceToPounds` a few times with different inputs and `console.log` the outputs in order to check your function. 🙂

---

> <br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

2. Create a function called `increaseByHalf` that should

- take a number as an input
- return this input number **increased by a half**

E.g. `increaseByHalf(50)` should **evaluate** to `75` 

E.g. `increaseByHalf(100)` should **evaluate** to `150`

In your groups, think carefully about the following things:

- what the parameter name should be
- creating good names for any variables you use
- don't use `console.log` inside the body of the function

Call `increaseByHalf` a few times with different inputs and `console.log` the outputs in order to check your function is working properly.

> Now declare a variable called `pocketMoney` and assign to it a value of `413`.<br />
> Someone's been generous and decided to increase your `pocketMoney` by 50% 😎

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now declare a variable called `pocketMoney` and assign to it a value of `413`.

Someone's been generous and decided to increase your `pocketMoney` by 50% 😎
```

> Using the functions `increaseByHalf` and `formatPenceToPounds` only, find the new amount of pocket money as a string in pounds with a `£` symbol at the front.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the functions `increaseByHalf` and `formatPenceToPounds` only, find the new amount of pocket money as a string in pounds with a `£` symbol at the front.

Then use `console.log` the output in order to check your function.
```

---

> <br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

3. Check out the code below:

```js
function printMessage(x) {
  console.log('Hello, nice to meet you ' + x);
}

function getMessage(name) {
  return 'Hello, nice to meet you ' + name;
}

printMessage('Mitch');

printMessage('August');

getMessage('Laetitia');
```

The functions above behave similarly but _differ_ in some important ways.

In groups, study the code above and then answer the following questions:

> a) How many times is the function `printMessage` called ?<br />
> b) How many times is the function `getMessage` called ?<br />
> c) What is the parameter name for the function `printMessage` ?<br />
> d) What is the parameter name for the function `getMessage` ?<br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a) How many times is the function `printMessage` called ?
b) How many times is the function `getMessage` called ?
c) What is the parameter name for the function `printMessage` ?
d) What is the parameter name for the function `getMessage` ?
```

Discuss briefly which **parameter name** is better out of the two functions and why ?

e) What is the **return value** of the function `printMessage` whenever it is called ?

Someone then creates 2 further variables `messageForAli` and `curiousMessage`:

```js
const messageForAli = getMessage('Ali');

const curiousMessage = getMessage(42);
```

> f) What will the variable `messageForAli` evaluate to when the code above is executed ?<br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
f) What will the variable `messageForAli` evaluate to when the code above is executed ?
```

> g) What will the variable `curiousMessage` evaluate to when the code above is executed ?

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it's worth adding a point about how to find out what the answers are?

I understand that one of the goals is to reduce confusion about `console.log`, but I think this is a good opportunity to show that it should be used for debugging purposes.

Hint: Think carefully about the parameters and arguments for `getMessage` for part g)

### Exercise (10 minutes)

> 1. Swap your laptop with your neighbouring pair and review each other's code - what can be improved? Is the code readable?

Reviewer: Do we want to be more explicit about what code we're talking about here? Maybe something like:
```suggestion
1. Swap your laptop with your neighbouring pair and review each other's code for the `formatPenceToPounds` and `increaseByHalf` exercise - what can be improved? Is the code readable?
```

Also, do we want to suggest a concrete way of doing this over Zoom? Something like "Pair up, and send your code to your pair over Slack"?
